Title: A TextMate tip for Emacs users
Date: July 3, 2007
Timestamp: 1183481100
Author: sjs
Tags: emacs, keyboard shortcuts, textmate
----

*Update: The only place I've seen this mentioned is in a <a href="http://macromates.com/blog/2005/screencast/#comment-660">comment</a> on the MacroMates blog.*

My Linux box is down due to a hardware failure; a cheap SATA controller to be specific. Perhaps that will be a story for another day. As a result I've been working on my MacBook and back in TextMate. Old habits. And I haven't gotten comfortable in any of the OS X Emacsen yet.

This gave me an opportunity to accidentally discover some shortcuts in TextMate. A result of the Emacs shortcuts that my fingers are already wired to, here are some TextMate keyboard shortcuts that may or may not be <a href="http://macromates.com/textmate/manual/">documented</a> (I need to RTFM some day).

 * As in most Cocoa text areas, <code>C-f</code>, <code>C-b</code>, <code>C-n</code>, <code>C-p</code>, <code>C-a</code>, <code>C-e</code>, and <code>C-t</code> work as expected (and others I'm sure).
 * <code>C-k</code>: behaves as a vanilla Emacs, killing till a newline or killing a bare newline. I use the word killing specifically because you can yank it back with...
 * <code>C-y</code>: yanks back the last thing on the kill ring (paste history). You still have to use <code>C-S-v</code> to yank previous items.

I think TextMate may have helped ease me into Emacs without me even knowing. I had my suspicions that Allan was an Emacs fan and now I'm certain of it. I keep finding things in one that the other has, which makes switching between them easy. Well done Allan.
