Title: SOPA lives - and MPAA calls protests an "abuse of power"
Date: January 17, 2012
Timestamp: 1326797200
Link: http://arstechnica.com/tech-policy/news/2012/01/sopa-livesand-mpaa-calls-protests-an-abuse-of-power.ars
Comments: off
----

> rather than coming to the table to find solutions to a problem that all
now seem to agree is very real and damaging.

No. All most certainly do *not* agree.

> It is also an abuse of power given the freedoms these companies enjoy in
the marketplace today. It's a dangerous and troubling development when the
platforms that serve as gateways to information intentionally skew the
facts to incite their users in order to further their corporate interests.

This must be a joke. It's a joke, right? Please tell me this joker is
joking. The hypocrisy is too much.

> stop the hyperbole and PR stunts and engage in meaningful efforts to
combat piracy.

There is absolutely nothing reasonable that anyone can do to "combat
piracy". Digital copies are cheap. Adapt or die.

The VCR did not kill media industries. Nor the cassette, CD, DVD. Why
should anyone believe that computers and the Internet are going to kill
music and movies?

If the MPAA displayed even a shred of sanity maybe they would be taken
seriously in their efforts to curb piracy. The biggest problem I can see is
that studies have given us evidence that they are not hurt by it at all.
Their tactic of choice seems to be to loudly decry "Nuh-uh! Piracy
*does* hurt us!" and then strong arming everyone worldwide while suing anyone and
everyone. If times are so tough maybe they should cut some of their budgets
for lawyers and lobbyists.
